JT's First Technical Blog Post

Saturday, November 22, 2014

Greetings Friends, 

About five years ago, I started working in the trading room of a bank in New York City.  John, one of the senior traders on the desk, pulled me aside almost immediately and told me the two credos he likes to live his life by:  1) "If it don't make dollars, it don't make sense"; and 2) "If you have creases in your shoes, you're walking too much."  I have to be honest: I still don't know what the hell any of that means. Fast forward a few years and I've found that the only thing that I really enjoy about banking is the wonderful friendships I've developed, such as the one with the aforementioned knucklehead.  Which is why I decided that my last day at the bank will be next week.  And why I sit before you today writing a blog about version control.  Any one that knows me can tell you that I can tie just about any topic to sports and pop culture (apologies in advance for all of the Seinfeld references you'll have to suffer through), and this blog will be no different.  On that note, here we go: 

Version control is the tech world's equivalent of trying to throw the perfect game in baseball. The perfect game, for those that are unfamiliar, is one of the rarest feats in sports: it involves a pitcher throwing 9 innings of scoreless, no-hit, no-walk baseball.  Only 23 pitchers have done it and the last one was by Felix Hernandez in 2012.  In the coding world, this perfection is key as any little bug or syntax error in the program could cause the whole thing to not work.  
 
 Let's walk through this analogy.  Felix is playing the Tampa Bay Devil Rays and he mows them down in order 1,2,3 in the first inning.  You will definitely want to save this beautiful piece of work, so you type in a couple quick instructions into the Command Line ( git add . , git commit), and the first inning goes from the working directory, to a staging area, and finally to a .git directory (repository).  Now Felix is an All-Star pitcher and keeps sailing along smoothly in this fashion until the sixth inning.  Which is great: we just keep saving Felix's work in an incremental fashion every inning or so, committing his work in the manner described above.  In the sixth inning, however, Felix runs into trouble, and gives up a three-run homer to Rays cleanup hitter Evan Longoria.  Needless to say, we aren't going to keep these changes.  We roll back to the fifth inning commit and repeat so Felix can get it right.  The power of version control lies in the ability to make these incremental changes so that we don't lose the entire body of work and poor Felix has to start again from pitch 1.  And the beauty is we can even make the decision after a few future commits.  Let's suppose that Felix has done a pretty good job, but we realize in the 8th inning that his pitch count is too high and we want him to be more efficient in throwing the perfect game: we can actually roll back to the 5th inning commit at this point.  

 If the version control process I described above were to take place on one's local machine, it would be done with Git.  But let's take it a little further and extend this example to Github, the web-based 
 Git repository hosting service.  Now Felix can take his baseball project and collaborate with his buddies in the Mariners bullpen.  Felix can upload, say the first 3 innings, and 6 of his reliever friends can each contribute an inning of work.  Version control would ensure that none of the pitchers overwrites each other's work.  The result: the same perfect game as Felix would have had to pitch on his own locally.Pretty cool stuff right?   